READ-nodered_Projects.md, before:

## Working with NodeRed Projects AND remote repos

### Introduction

The new feature since NodeRed v0.18.3 Projects has lots of potential, for building NodeRed templates for multiple deploy, such as in the iotplay case where more-than-one clients' use the same flows.  

Herewith steps to configure it for the following use case:  
- Develop on NodeRed, (on docker on Mac);  
- Commit changes in a NodeRed 'Project' to local git under NodeRed;  
- then to do a remote commit to git on bitbucket (you can have private repo's, unlike on github, but any git repo will work);  
- and lastly to use Ansible to deploy the runtime, and a bash script to unpack the NodeRed code to the folders of each of the clients.  

In this example, we will start with local NodeRed flows which have lready been developed, create the remote rpos, and pushing these to the remote.

#### Links to useful info on Projects, and Bitbucket

- NodeRed Projects feature - [NodeRed docs](https://nodered.org/docs/user-guide/projects/)
- Setting up bitbucket ssh public key - [Atlasian](https://confluence.atlassian.com/bbkb/permission-denied-publickey-302811860.html)

#### Steps in the ReadMe:
- Step 1: Create NodeRed keys for remote repos
- Step 2: Prepare the localhost ssh keys for use in steps 7 - SourceTree clone
- Step 3: Configure a remote repo on Bitbucket
- Step 4: Configure BitBucket repo
- Step 5: Add the Remote Repo in NodeRed
- Step 6: Commit NodeRed Project to BitBucket
- Step 7: Clone BitBucket repo to local Host
- Step 8: Prepare the ../Git_bitbucket clone to reproduce NodeRed
- Step 9: Use Ansible to clone the repo from BitBucket & Prepare NodeRed runtime
- Step 10: Point local Mac docker instance back to the ~/Git_bitbucket folder

#### Products used in this readme file

- NodeRed
- BitBucket
- SourceTree
- Docker & Ansible (later steps)

#### Assumptions

Several assumptions have been used for this readme:
- You have got Projects up and running, see instructions on [NodeRed docs](https://nodered.org/docs/user-guide/projects/)


## Steps to configure ...  

#### Step 1:  Create NodeRed keys for remote repos

If you use Docker to start the NodeRed flows - already got Projects working, start it now, and access the admin client.
Setup a remote repo key in NodeRed:
- From menu option:  
  `Project Settings > Settings > add remote`  
  'Allows you to create secure connections to remote git repositories.'  
  See **Screen 1: add key** below.  

  Settings, eg.:  
  - Name: `nodered_client_dbr`
  - Passphrase: eight characters   


- In NodeRed, the key are stored in folder:  
  `data/projects/.sshkeys`, with above name, the key names are:
    - default_nodered_client_dbr
    - default_nodered_client_dbr.pub  

#### Step 2: Prepare the localhost ssh keys for use in steps 7 - SourceTree clone

- Copy the above SSH keys created to your host .ssh key folder,  
  `cp <localNRfolder>/data/projects/.sshkeys/*.* ~/.ssh`  

- Load this ssh identity on the local host with command ssh-add ~/.ssh/<identity>:
  `ssh-add ~/.ssh/<identity> `. For this example command below, it will sk you for the passphrase you used in `Step 1`:  

  `ssh-add ~/.ssh/__default_nodered_client_dbr`

- Test if the identity loaded with `ssh-add -l`.


#### Step 3: Configure a remote repo on Bitbucket  

Create yourself a user on Bitbucket, in this example's case, the user is `iotplay`.

If, for instance, for the client `client_dbr`, the local NodeRed `template` folder, for the client template NodeRed flows `NRC01` with a project name `master`, the repo name on bitbucket should be:  

`/client_dbr/tmpl/dbr_NRC01/Prj.master`

Create a new Repository in Bitbucket with this name.

#### Step 4: Configure BitBucket repo for xxx

- On the local host, get the public key in the clipboard:  
  `cat ~/.ssh/__default_nodered_client_dbr.pub | pbcopy`  

- ***SSH Keys***. In BitBucket, click on your Avatar, (left bottom) go to Bitbucket settings > in Security section - SSH keys > Add key.  
  - *Label*:  `__default_nodered_client_dbr`
  - *Key*: paste the public key from the clipboard  


- In the BitBucket Repo, initiate the repo, by for instance creating the default `readme.md` under the `Source` menu option, and commit it.  

- Get the https link to the repo under menu option `Overview`. For the example used, it is:
  `https://iotplay@bitbucket.org/iotplay/client_dbr-tmpl-dbr_nrc01-prj.master.git`


#### Step 5: Add the Remote Repo in NodeRed

On NodeRed, menu `Project Settings > Settings > add remote` use the above url from Overview on Bitbucket, minus the username, add to `URL` on Screen 2: add remote (see below). Thus:  

>URL: `https://bitbucket.org/iotplay/client_dbr-tmpl-dbr_nrc01-prj.master.git`, and hit `Add  Remote` button.

#### Step 6: Commit NodeRed Project to BitBucket  

Setup the remote branch:  
- See screen 3 below, on menu: `Control Panel > history tab > Commit History`;  
- Click on the up/down arrows;  
- A screen, see `Screen 4` will pop up, under 'Authentication required for repository:', add the Username and Password of your Bitbucket account.

Replicate the local NodeRed flows to the Remote:
  - Some conflicts might show up if you have a local readme.md already, solve these.
  - Choose the origin/mast as branch, tick the `set as upstrem master`, and hit `push` button to clone to remote.

Confirm that the files reached the bitbucket, by viewing 'source' menu option under the Repo.  

#### Step 7: Clone BitBucket repo to local Host

Once your SourceTree  [download SourceTree here](https://www.sourcetreeapp.com) is setup to read your BitBucket user, you can clone it to the local Mac, to for instance add folders (BitBucket cannot add folders otherwise)

- Clone to local with SourceTree app, button `clone`, see `Screen 6`.
- Choose local folder, in this example, I chose:  
  `~/Git_bitbucket/client_dbr/tmpl/dbr_nrc01/data/projects/master/`  
- whilst I ensured the name is `dbr_nrc01-master`.  

#### Step 8: Prepare the ~/Git_bitbucket clone to reproduce NodeRed on Runtime host

In order to prepare the clone to be used on a target host where NodeRed are to be started, some steps are required.   

Like getting the `settings.js` file into the repo. A good place to put files, is in a sub-folder to the cloned folder, then it will be cloned as well, I chose `setup`.

- Go to the local cloned folder on your host in `Step 7` above, and add a folder `setup`
- From the NodeRed server, under `/data`, copy `settings.js` into the `setup` folder.
- In the SourceTree cloned copy screen, hit commit button, see `Screen 7`.
- On the next screen, choose the settings.js file, give a reason in the commit box at the bottom, I chose 'setup files added', and hit the `Commit` button.
- If you now go back to Bitbucket, under the Source menu of the Repo, you will find the folder, and file/s cloned to it.

Now you are ready for cloning the Repo to a production host, and copying this template files, like `flows.json` and other files to Docker instances.  

#### Step 9: Use Ansible to clone the repo from BitBucket & Prepare NodeRed runtime
In this step, you can clone the runtime back to the Mac, or another host to test how it will run. I use the standard folder `~/dockerapps/`. Steps to do in Ansible:

- git clone this repo to the target host under `~/.tmp/dbr_nrc01`
- Create the runtime directory, `~/dockerapps/dbr_nrc01/data`
- Copy the NodeRed files with Ansible from the `.tmp/dbr_nrc01` folder:

  - `settings.js` --> `~/dockerapps/dbr_nrc01/data`
  - `flows.json`  --> `~/dockerapps/dbr_nrc01/data/projects/master/`
  - same for other files required for NodeRed.

#### Step 10: Point local Mac docker instance back to the ~/Git_bitbucket folder
Now that all files required to start-up the NodeRed files from the ~/Git_bitbucket folder, the `Dockerfile` used to startup the Mac NodeRed docker instance for `dbr_NRC01` can be pointed to the newly cloned folder.

I have not tested this yet, but this is the next step I will test.

## Issues

During the process I ran into several issues, here are the solutions.

#### NodeRed:  

1. **Issue 1: When credentials not sorted** - when NodeRed starts, See Screen 8.

    **Solution 1: Dealing with credentials**

    - [node-red wiki](https://github.com/node-red/node-red/wiki/Design%3A-Encryption-of-credentials)  
    - [Stack overflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/48270905/node-red-node-credentials)  

  Here are the steps you need to resolve this:

    - edit your settings.js file and add a credentialSecret property with a whatever string value you want. If you want to disable encryption, set its value to false.  
      `credentialSecret: "my-random-string"`
    - Restart Node-RED and deploy a change - this will trigger Node-RED to re-encrypt your credentials with your chosen key (or disabling encryption if set to false).
    - You can then copy your flow/credential file to a second instance, just make sure you give it the same credentialSecret value in its settings file.

#### SourceTree (in sync with BitBucket)

1. **Issue 1: Credentials issues when SourceTree pushes to Bitbucket**. When sync stops, and the error box reports the below:

  ```
  Pushing to git@bitbucket.org:iotplay/client_dbr-tmpl-dbr_nrp01-prj.master.git
  git@bitbucket.org: Permission denied (publickey).
  fatal: Could not read from remote repository.

  Please make sure you have the correct access rights
  and the repository exists.
  Pushing to git@bitbucket.org:iotplay/client_dbr-tmpl-dbr_nrp01-prj.master.git
  git@bitbucket.org: Permission denied (publickey).
  fatal: Could not read from remote repository.
  ```
  **Solution 1: Step 2**   
  Run `ssh-add ~/.ssh/__default_nodered_client_dbr`.

## Screens used in above examples

- NodeRed:

  - **Screen 1: add key**  
  menu: Settings > Git config > add key :  

      ![add key](images/nodered_gitconfig.png)  
      .

  - **Screen 2: add remote**  
    menu: Project Settings > Settings > add remote :   

      ![add remote](images/nodered_addremote.png)  
      .

  - **Screen 3: Commit to Remote**  
    menu: Control Panel > history tab > Commit History  

      ![commit history](images/nodered_committoremote.png)  
      .  

  - **Screen 4: Authentication required**  

      ![commit history](images/nodered_authreq.png)  
      .  

  - **Screen 5: Authentication required**  

      ![commit history](images/nodered_remotebranch.png)  
      .  

  - **Screen 6: Clone in SourceTree**  

      ![commit history](images/sourcetree_clonerepo.png)  
      .  

  - **Screen 7: Commit in SourceTree**  

      ![commit history](images/sourcetree_commit.png)  
      .  
  - **Screen 8: NodeRed - credentials**  

      ![commit history](images/nodered_credentials.png)  
      .

Commit message:

Issues
Updated for NodeRed Projects- or not.

READ-nodered_Projects.md, after:

## Working with NodeRed Projects AND remote repos

### Introduction

The new feature since NodeRed v0.18.3 Projects has lots of potential, for building NodeRed templates for multiple deploy, such as in the iotplay case where more-than-one clients' use the same flows.  

Herewith steps to configure it for the following use case:  
- Develop on NodeRed, (on docker on Mac);  
- Commit changes in a NodeRed 'Project' to local git under NodeRed;  
- then to do a remote commit to git on bitbucket (you can have private repo's, unlike on github, but any git repo will work);  
- and lastly to use Ansible to deploy the runtime, and a bash script to unpack the NodeRed code to the folders of each of the clients.  

In this example, we will start with local NodeRed flows which have lready been developed, create the remote rpos, and pushing these to the remote.

#### Links to useful info on Projects, and Bitbucket

- NodeRed Projects feature - [NodeRed docs](https://nodered.org/docs/user-guide/projects/)
- Setting up bitbucket ssh public key - [Atlasian](https://confluence.atlassian.com/bbkb/permission-denied-publickey-302811860.html)

#### Steps in the ReadMe:
- Step 1: Create NodeRed keys for remote repos
- Step 2: Prepare the localhost ssh keys for use in steps 7 - SourceTree clone
- Step 3: Configure a remote repo on Bitbucket
- Step 4: Configure BitBucket repo
- Step 5: Add the Remote Repo in NodeRed
- Step 6: Commit NodeRed Project to BitBucket
- Step 7: Clone BitBucket repo to local Host
- Step 8: Prepare the ../Git_bitbucket clone to reproduce NodeRed
- Step 9: Use Ansible to clone the repo from BitBucket & Prepare NodeRed runtime
- Step 10: Point local Mac docker instance back to the ~/Git_bitbucket folder

#### Products used in this readme file

- NodeRed
- BitBucket
- SourceTree
- Docker & Ansible (later steps)

#### Assumptions

Several assumptions have been used for this readme:
- You have got Projects up and running, see instructions on [NodeRed docs](https://nodered.org/docs/user-guide/projects/)


## Steps to configure ...  

#### Step 1:  Create NodeRed keys for remote repos

If you use Docker to start the NodeRed flows - already got Projects working, start it now, and access the admin client.
Setup a remote repo key in NodeRed:
- From menu option:  
  `Project Settings > Settings > add remote`  
  'Allows you to create secure connections to remote git repositories.'  
  See **Screen 1: add key** below.  

  Settings, eg.:  
  - Name: `nodered_client_dbr`
  - Passphrase: eight characters   


- In NodeRed, the key are stored in folder:  
  `data/projects/.sshkeys`, with above name, the key names are:
    - default_nodered_client_dbr
    - default_nodered_client_dbr.pub  

#### Step 2: Prepare the localhost ssh keys for use in steps 7 - SourceTree clone

- Copy the above SSH keys created to your host .ssh key folder,  
  `cp <localNRfolder>/data/projects/.sshkeys/*.* ~/.ssh`  

- Load this ssh identity on the local host with command ssh-add ~/.ssh/<identity>:
  `ssh-add ~/.ssh/<identity> `. For this example command below, it will sk you for the passphrase you used in `Step 1`:  

  `ssh-add ~/.ssh/__default_nodered_client_dbr`

- Test if the identity loaded with `ssh-add -l`.


#### Step 3: Configure a remote repo on Bitbucket  

Create yourself a user on Bitbucket, in this example's case, the user is `iotplay`.

If, for instance, for the client `client_dbr`, the local NodeRed `template` folder, for the client template NodeRed flows `NRC01` with a project name `master`, the repo name on bitbucket should be:  

`/client_dbr/tmpl/dbr_NRC01/Prj.master`

Create a new Repository in Bitbucket with this name.

#### Step 4: Configure BitBucket repo for xxx

- On the local host, get the public key in the clipboard:  
  `cat ~/.ssh/__default_nodered_client_dbr.pub | pbcopy`  

- ***SSH Keys***. In BitBucket, click on your Avatar, (left bottom) go to Bitbucket settings > in Security section - SSH keys > Add key.  
  - *Label*:  `__default_nodered_client_dbr`
  - *Key*: paste the public key from the clipboard  


- In the BitBucket Repo, initiate the repo, by for instance creating the default `readme.md` under the `Source` menu option, and commit it.  

- Get the https link to the repo under menu option `Overview`. For the example used, it is:
  `https://iotplay@bitbucket.org/iotplay/client_dbr-tmpl-dbr_nrc01-prj.master.git`


#### Step 5: Add the Remote Repo in NodeRed

On NodeRed, menu `Project Settings > Settings > add remote` use the above url from Overview on Bitbucket, minus the username, add to `URL` on Screen 2: add remote (see below). Thus:  

>URL: `https://bitbucket.org/iotplay/client_dbr-tmpl-dbr_nrc01-prj.master.git`, and hit `Add  Remote` button.

#### Step 6: Commit NodeRed Project to BitBucket  

Setup the remote branch:  
- See screen 3 below, on menu: `Control Panel > history tab > Commit History`;  
- Click on the up/down arrows;  
- A screen, see `Screen 4` will pop up, under 'Authentication required for repository:', add the Username and Password of your Bitbucket account.

Replicate the local NodeRed flows to the Remote:
  - Some conflicts might show up if you have a local readme.md already, solve these.
  - Choose the origin/mast as branch, tick the `set as upstrem master`, and hit `push` button to clone to remote.

Confirm that the files reached the bitbucket, by viewing 'source' menu option under the Repo.  

#### Step 7: Clone BitBucket repo to local Host

Once your SourceTree  [download SourceTree here](https://www.sourcetreeapp.com) is setup to read your BitBucket user, you can clone it to the local Mac, to for instance add folders (BitBucket cannot add folders otherwise)

- Clone to local with SourceTree app, button `clone`, see `Screen 6`.
- Choose local folder, in this example, I chose:  
  `~/Git_bitbucket/client_dbr/tmpl/dbr_nrc01/data/projects/master/`  
- whilst I ensured the name is `dbr_nrc01-master`.  

#### Step 8: Prepare the ~/Git_bitbucket clone to reproduce NodeRed on Runtime host

In order to prepare the clone to be used on a target host where NodeRed are to be started, some steps are required.   

Like getting the `settings.js` file into the repo. A good place to put files, is in a sub-folder to the cloned folder, then it will be cloned as well, I chose `setup`.

- Go to the local cloned folder on your host in `Step 7` above, and add a folder `setup`
- From the NodeRed server, under `/data`, copy `settings.js` into the `setup` folder.
- In the SourceTree cloned copy screen, hit commit button, see `Screen 7`.
- On the next screen, choose the settings.js file, give a reason in the commit box at the bottom, I chose 'setup files added', and hit the `Commit` button.
- If you now go back to Bitbucket, under the Source menu of the Repo, you will find the folder, and file/s cloned to it.

Now you are ready for cloning the Repo to a production host, and copying this template files, like `flows.json` and other files to Docker instances.  

#### Step 9: Use Ansible to clone the repo from BitBucket & Prepare NodeRed runtime
In this step, you can clone the runtime back to the Mac, or another host to test how it will run. I use the standard folder `~/dockerapps/`. Steps to do in Ansible:

- git clone this repo to the target host under `~/.tmp/dbr_nrc01`
- Create the runtime directory, `~/dockerapps/dbr_nrc01/data`
- Copy the NodeRed files with Ansible from the `.tmp/dbr_nrc01` folder:

  - `settings.js` --> `~/dockerapps/dbr_nrc01/data`
  - `flows.json`  --> `~/dockerapps/dbr_nrc01/data/projects/master/`
  - same for other files required for NodeRed.

#### Step 10: Point local Mac docker instance back to the ~/Git_bitbucket folder
Now that all files required to start-up the NodeRed files from the ~/Git_bitbucket folder, the `Dockerfile` used to startup the Mac NodeRed docker instance for `dbr_NRC01` can be pointed to the newly cloned folder.

I have not tested this yet, but this is the next step I will test.

## Issues

During the process I ran into several issues, here are the solutions.

#### NodeRed:  

1. **Issue 1: When credentials not sorted** - when NodeRed starts, See Screen 8.

    **Solution 1: Dealing with credentials**

    - [node-red wiki](https://github.com/node-red/node-red/wiki/Design%3A-Encryption-of-credentials)  
    - [Stack overflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/48270905/node-red-node-credentials)  

  Here are the steps you need to resolve this:

    - edit your settings.js file and add a credentialSecret property with a whatever string value you want. If you want to disable encryption, set its value to false.  
      `credentialSecret: "my-random-string"`
    - Restart Node-RED and deploy a change - this will trigger Node-RED to re-encrypt your credentials with your chosen key (or disabling encryption if set to false).
    - You can then copy your flow/credential file to a second instance, just make sure you give it the same credentialSecret value in its settings file.  


2. **Issue 2: Using Projects or not on Runtime server**. I thought it would be a workable solution to do the Projects-type setup on the Mac, and without Projects on the Runtime server. One can do this with 2 different `settings.js` files.

  **Solution 2: Projects on runtime server.** After experimenting with this, it seams it is best to use Projects on the Runtime server as well, (for now - until the runtime feature is available on NR). Reasons are:  

  - With Projects, one can add packages required in packages.json, and does not need to do this at Container creation stage.
  - Thus, `Projects` - and the file structure - on the Runtime server as well.

#### SourceTree (in sync with BitBucket)

1. **Issue 1: Credentials issues when SourceTree pushes to Bitbucket**. When sync stops, and the error box reports the below:

  ```
  Pushing to git@bitbucket.org:iotplay/client_dbr-tmpl-dbr_nrp01-prj.master.git
  git@bitbucket.org: Permission denied (publickey).
  fatal: Could not read from remote repository.

  Please make sure you have the correct access rights
  and the repository exists.
  Pushing to git@bitbucket.org:iotplay/client_dbr-tmpl-dbr_nrp01-prj.master.git
  git@bitbucket.org: Permission denied (publickey).
  fatal: Could not read from remote repository.
  ```
  **Solution 1: Step 2**   
  Run `ssh-add ~/.ssh/__default_nodered_client_dbr`.

## Screens used in above examples

- NodeRed:

  - **Screen 1: add key**  
  menu: Settings > Git config > add key :  

      ![add key](images/nodered_gitconfig.png)  
      .

  - **Screen 2: add remote**  
    menu: Project Settings > Settings > add remote :   

      ![add remote](images/nodered_addremote.png)  
      .

  - **Screen 3: Commit to Remote**  
    menu: Control Panel > history tab > Commit History  

      ![commit history](images/nodered_committoremote.png)  
      .  

  - **Screen 4: Authentication required**  

      ![commit history](images/nodered_authreq.png)  
      .  

  - **Screen 5: Authentication required**  

      ![commit history](images/nodered_remotebranch.png)  
      .  

  - **Screen 6: Clone in SourceTree**  

      ![commit history](images/sourcetree_clonerepo.png)  
      .  

  - **Screen 7: Commit in SourceTree**  

      ![commit history](images/sourcetree_commit.png)  
      .  
  - **Screen 8: NodeRed - credentials**  

      ![commit history](images/nodered_credentials.png)  
      .
